Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Koli Moore, and I want to thank you all for listening, and I would ask you to subscribe to the podcast if you have not yet already, and tell your friends. Word of mouth is really good for us, especially if you're liking the content. We hope that we can get everyone training better.
So for questions, comments, coaching, or consultation inquiries, you can please email empiricalcycling at gmail.com and of course that goes straight to me. So originally I had written this episode a couple different ways about a couple different topics like FTP, VO2 max intervals, progressing different types of intervals and I kept coming back to this idea about how intervals cause adaptation and I think this is actually a crucial piece of background before the next series of episodes on Wattstock because we had been
Talking a lot about some of the in-depth physiology and we're going to get back to that but the next couple episodes I really want to do a lot of practical application and advice about a bunch of the things that we had been talking about and how we use those actually in training plans to improve people's physiology and to make them faster. So today we're going to start with some background and we're going to get into my particular philosophy on this kind of thing and then we're going to touch on some different energy systems and why I think a deeper understanding
of the physiology is crucial. So to me, when thinking about intervals, the most important things are, number one, what part of your physiology are they supposed to change? Doing intervals different ways can slightly target different pieces of your physiology. We'll talk a little bit about that. And how does this impact short and long-term interval planning? Like how does the focus of this interval set?
What physiologic systems do you want to work on? How does this change how you plan the intervals on the day? And how does this change how you might progress the intervals through a training plan or account for the fatigue these intervals might cause? And number three, which we're just going to put on the back burner for now, but I kind of want it in the back of your mind when we talk about this, is what do you need for races? And we'll do a separate episode about that, of course. But for now, I just wanted to touch on it briefly. That's something to consider.
So the other thing that you should know that we're going to get into depth with in several upcoming Wallstock episodes is that your power output, which is a measure of stress, does not correlate one-to-one with a certain metabolic state or internal strain. So this is the classic exercise physiology of stress versus strain. What can we physically measure as your output versus what is actually happening to you internally?
And there's a lot that goes into this kind of thing. And, you know, I know there's a couple of things that model it, including some of the modeling that I've helped with in WK05. Nobody does it perfectly. I, of course, think the WK05 way to do it is the best way we have so far. I use it all the time. And other places kind of do something like it. I don't think they're 90% there. Not quite. But just know that...
The modeling of things is not always amazing. We're trying, we're doing our best, but we're not there yet. So the other thing that we should think about, as I touched on, is fatigue.
and the way fatigue has a role in our physiologic state and the way that those things affect our intervals. So if someone is tired from work or stressed, somebody hasn't been eating or sleeping enough, or you're experiencing a lot of fatigue from training, there are types of intervals that we should avoid, in my opinion, like sprints and anaerobic power focus kind of stuff, where really getting all the watts out that you can is a really crucial part of adaptation.
With other types of training, like long endurance rides, technique work, some, but not all of course, types of fatigue that will probably lower power output, but they will not change your subsequent adaptation and may even improve it. And we're going to get into depth on some of this stuff. I'm really looking forward to it. So the duration of intervals.
is the other dimension that we have here, not just the intensity and what we can measure, the duration, because everything we do has both a duration and intensity component to it. So while intensity can be measured in a few ways, we can only measure time by the clock and especially for things around it under threshold.
The body is acutely aware of this. My threshold, I mean FTP, of course. That's a hint about the next Wattstock episode because we're going to dive right into this kind of stuff. But here's a preview. So if your time to exhaustion at FTP is 45 minutes, doing 2x20 minutes of sweet spot is very, very likely not going to improve your FTP. Especially if the time that you can hold your sweet spot power, that being about 90% of FTP, if you can hold that
Power in the 80 to 90 minute range, you know, doing 40 minutes is, you know, it's maintenance work to me. So no matter what it says in some arbitrary rubric about how much sweet spot a certain category racer should do, yes, I'm referencing that chart you probably just thought of, you know, that is to me not physiologically sound.
and there are better ways to approach it which we're going to get into of course. So when we do intervals and expect improvement the metrics that we have to measure performance need context. During intervals the energy systems that we're using change with time
this is the crucial component here so for any system of training or zones or levels any measurement you have a VO2 max or a threshold power any threshold power lactate whatever you got including all lab tests these all change with your physiologic state the energy contribution and what is happening internally versus what's happening externally so that is something really really crucial to think about
for the next couple episodes and when you're planning your intervals. Because remember, metabolic state is a reaction to demand. ATP levels fall and energy systems work to refill the loss of ATP. So here's an example is heart rate. Because it lags behind effort, we can use it as an approximation, just an approximation of oxygen demand. So if you go from easy riding to starting interval, say 50 to...
50 watts to 350 watts. Energy is spent initially with whatever insufficient oxygen is around, of course, and anaerobic sources like phosphocreatine and glycolysis. And over time, heart rate increases. But like I said, it's an approximation because heart rate does not correlate one-to-one with oxygen delivery. Because you can actually be at VO2 max and not at maximum heart rate and vice versa.
So really cool study on that that we're going to get to. So let's say for instance, you warm up and you begin an interval of one minute at what you assume to be your VO2 max power, let's say 350 watts. I guarantee that in that first minute, you are not at VO2 max and you may not be for quite some time. And so the same happens with other energy systems. So look forward to stuff on that. So with spritz and anaerobic type efforts, the directive I usually give athletes is just go all out.
or a certain perceived effort that's close to maximal. So we'll talk about the physiology of this and how I structure intervals for this kind of thing. The parts of the workout that I focus on most with this is actually duration of the effort and making sure that there's enough rest between reps. So going max with these types of intervals is one of the keys to adaptation regardless of how good or bad a sprinter you are.
So you're also going to want to consider that maybe after six to ten weeks of anaerobic capacity improvement, the improvements actually stop. And this is one of the things that I've seen frustrate a lot of athletes. So this is where you need to consider the limiters of your capacity, things like muscle mass. And we've touched a little bit on this before, and we'll get into it again. And we also need to think about the accumulated fatigue of all these efforts, both in and out of season.
At least for me, the longer that I coach, the more intervals I prescribe by perceived effort rather than power, which is not to say I never prescribe power targets. I do all the time.
But I'm finding that I can actually get people to train better and teach them to self-pace better and I can make them faster in less time and with less fatigue by not over-prescribing efforts by power because I understand what is happening, the difference between the power output and the heart rate and all that kind of stuff and what I think is happening inside an athlete's body.
So in other words, with a few tweaks, you can target actually specific adaptive pathways better than by targeting with power. So in the exercise physiology world, the canonical terms here, again, are stress and strain. So stress being what we can measure externally with power and heart rate and cadence and strain being what's happening internally. And the relationship between these two things changes with time. And that's going to be the subject.
of some really in-depth analysis of upcoming Wattstock episodes. And not to forget, of course, that we're also going to be getting into the very practical application of this knowledge.
Thank you for tuning in to this episode of 10 Minute Tips. Please subscribe and tell your friends. If you're enjoying the content, we would also ask that you go into iTunes and give us a good rating and a review. That really helps us in the rankings. For questions, comments, coaching, and consultation inquiries, you can please email empiricalcycling at gmail.com. As always, thank you guys for listening.